Metadata and endangered archives 53
of the texts for meaning, and partly done by comparing stock phrases found
often in the texts. So, for example, in the manuscript Ming Mvng Lung Phai,
and indeed in all spirit calling texts, there are phrases used for calling the
spirit back, which in this manuscript follows the locations where the spirit
might be, as in Examples 5 and 6 above. This stock phrase is give as Example 7.
Example 7)
m] eka m; et] na cw h; /
mau ko ma te na chau vi
2sg link come true fin resp voc
“Come, please come, lord!” (EAP373_TileshwarMohan_Ming
MvngLungPhai, 6v1).
The presence of these phrases would be enough to identify the manuscript
as a spirit calling text, a group name for which is khon ming (khon “spirit”;
ming “tutelary spirit”). Medini Mohan has said that there are three main
texts within this genre: Khon Ming Lung Phai (lung “large”); Khon Ming
Kang Phai (kang “middle”); and Khon Ming Phai Noi (noi “small”). It has not
always been possible to say which of the three a particular text belongs to.
The relationship between contemporary ritual and
Tai Ahom manuscripts: The Ai Seng Lau prayer
During our photography sessions, the manuscript owners have sometimes
asked for a prayer to be performed before the work of photography is
commenced.52 This took various forms, sometimes involving the lighting of
an oil lamp (probably a Hindu influence) and the offering of money by the
project, but also included the recitation of the Ai Seng Lau prayer. Examples
of this were recorded in February 2013, in the home of Chau Hara Phukan
at Amguri, where we digitised 21 manuscripts;53 and in the home of Chau
Kamal Rajkonwar at Lakwa, where we digitised eleven manuscripts.54 The
prayer spoken on that occasion was the Ai Seng Lau, led on both occasions by
Medini Mohan. The first section of the Ai Seng Lau prayer, as it was uttered,
is given below as Example 8.
52 We hope that eventually the videos of these short ceremonies can be archived together
with the photographs of the manuscripts.
53 We will not list these here, but the digitised files will have the prefix EAP373_HaraPhukan_.
54 These will be archived with the prefix EAP373_KamolRajkonwar_.