36 From Dust to Digital
the 1970s,” adding that he believed the Ahom rituals were “created” in the
1960s.13 On the other hand, my consultants have maintained that the Me
Dam Me Phi ceremony was held since time immemorial in private houses
prior to its becoming a public ritual in the 1970s, using some of the prayers
found also in manuscript form.
The Ahom manuscripts
Regardless of the authenticity of these rituals, there is no doubt about the
authenticity of the manuscripts that preserve the Tai Ahom language in
a wide range of styles. While a number of manuscripts are held in public
institutions in Assam, such as the Department of Historical and Antiquarian
Studies in Guwahati, the Tai Museum in Sibsagar, and the Institute of Tai
Studies and Research in Moran, the large majority of Tai Ahom manuscripts
are kept in the homes of members of the Ahom priestly caste, many of whom
no longer know the language and cannot read the texts. These manuscripts
are often kept very well — nicely wrapped and regularly cleaned and kept
free of insects. However, by the time we came to see some of the manuscripts,
they were seriously damaged by water, damp or insects, with pages out of
order and portions of different manuscripts kept together. Our photography
sessions thus often involved time spent on cleaning manuscripts.14
Most of the surviving manuscripts photographed in the project were
copied in the late eighteenth or early nineteenth centuries, although the
tradition of manuscript copying is continuing. These older manuscripts are
overwhelmingly written on bark from the sasi tree (Aquillaria Agallocha),
which is cut, scraped and dried for some time before it can be used. In many
traditional Tai Ahom gardens, a sasi tree can still to be found. Apart from
the bark manuscripts, there are a smaller number of manuscripts written
on Assamese style silk, or other cloths. These usually contain the Phe Lung
Phe Ban text of calendrically related predictions (discussed in more detail
below). An example of one such silk manuscript is owned by Tileshwar
Mohan of Parijat village, measuring approximately 50 cm wide and 68 cm
long (Fig. 2.2).15
13 Terwiel, “Recreating the Past”, p. 286.
14 Mustard oil was found to be the best available substance to clean off generations of dirt
in order to be able to read the text. Often the first page of the manuscript was the one that
was most exposed to the elements and was virtually unreadable. This, not surprisingly,
made the identification of manuscripts even more difficult.
15 Usually it was necessary to photograph the silk manuscript both in full and in parts —
generally each of the four corners — in order to have a detailed enough photograph of
it. In the case of this manuscript, we decided to hold it up against the wall of the owner’s