Metadata and endangered archives 41
c. Spirit calling texts
i. Khon Ming Lung Phai (lung “large”)
ii. Khon Ming Kang Phai (kang “middle”)
iii. Khon Ming Phai Noi (noi “small”)
d. Mantras and prayers
e. Predictions and augury
i. Phe Lung Phe Ban
ii. Du Kai Seng (chicken bone augury)
iii. Ban Seng
f. Other priestly texts, relating to the performance of rituals, such as
those translated in Tai Ahoms and the Stars23
g. Calendar (Lakni)
h. Stories
i. Traditional Tai stories
ii. Stories of Buddhist origin
i. Lexicons (Bar Amra, Loti Amra)24
j. Writing Practice, manuscripts that involve copying the written syllables
of Tai Ahom in alphabetical order, presumably used to teach the script
The most common texts are probably those relating to prediction and augury
(e), with each of the three manuscript types listed there being found in multiple
copies from a variety of owners.25 For example, one manuscript owner, Kesab
23 Tai Ahoms and the Stars: Three Ritual Texts to Ward off Danger, ed. and trans. by B. J. Terwiel
and Ranoo Wichasin (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1992). This is an excellent and
well-notated translation.
24 These are Assamese terms for two lexicons composed in the late eighteenth century at
the time when the Ahom language was in decline as a mother tongue. Both are written
in Ahom script. The Bar Amra is a Tai Ahom-Assamese lexicon, mostly of monosyllabic
words, presented in the Ahom alphabetical order with Assamese words transcribed in
Ahom script. The Loti Amra is arranged in semantic fields commencing with body parts
and contains mostly multisyllabic expressions. Also written entirely in Ahom script, the
Loti Amra puts Assamese words first then Tai words second. These two lexicons formed
the basis of our online dictionary (http://sealang.net/ahom).
25 Once the project is completed, and all the texts identified, it will be possible to quantify
these claims. The texts in category (e), Phe Lung Phe Ban, Du Kai Seng, and Ban Seng, are
all very easy to identify, but some of the other categories are not.