Metadata and endangered archives 35
Tai Ahom is one of a group of Tai languages that is classified as part of
Southwestern Tai, because the historical home of speakers of these varieties is
in the southwestern area of the Tai speaking world (Thailand, southwestern
China, Laos and Myanmar).9
Unlike Tai Ahom, most of other communities speaking Southwestern Tai
languages are Buddhist.10 Several of them, for example the Tai Khamyang
and Tai Phake in India, also still practice ancient Tai rituals described in Tai
Ahom manuscripts, such as spirit calling. These rituals, together with chicken
bone augury, are observed by more distantly related linguistic groups, such
as Zhuang in China.11
The linguistic forms and the literature recorded in Tai Ahom manuscripts
are believed to represent one of the oldest examples of Tai language for which
we have records. Where a Tai Ahom manuscript is dated, the date is that of
its copying, and most of these are late eighteenth or early nineteenth century.
In the opinion of Chaichuen Khamdaengyodtai, who has assisted with the
identification and translation of some manuscripts, the texts are much older,
although there is no way of ascertaining their exact age.
The Ahom Kingdom ruled in Northeast India until the early nineteenth
century, but over time the Ahom community assimilated with the Assamese
speaking majority, and the Tai Ahom language was lost as a mother tongue
by about 1800.12 Today, most Tai Ahom people are Assamese speaking,
probably mostly monolingual, and are followers of Hinduism. Nevertheless,
the language does survive in some ritual contexts, such as the Me Dam Me
Phi ritual celebrated on 31 January every year. This festival became a public
event in the 1970s, and the date of 31 January was gazetted as a public holiday
in Assam some time after that. The authenticity of rituals such as this is not
uncontested. For example, B. J. Terwiel reported that “So far I have come
across no record of the state ritual of Medam Mephi being performed before
9 Li Fang-Kuei, A Handbook of Comparative Tai (Honolulu, HI: University of Hawaii Press,
1977). The other two main divisions of Tai, according to Li, are Central and Northern, and
both of these are to be found in China — in Yunnan, Sichuan and particularly Guangxi
provinces — as well as northern Vietnam. Speakers of Central and Northern Tai varieties
are not generally Buddhist. The modern location of the Tai Ahom is in fact north of most
of these areas, but that is due to migration since the thirteenth century.
10 A large proportion of Tai people in Vietnam and some in Laos practice what has been
described as “traditional religion”. For example, the White Tai (Tai Dón) are said to be
mostly animist.
11 Linguistically Zhuang is very diverse, and languages subsumed under this name fall
into both Central Tai and Northern Tai.
12 B. J. Terwiel, “Recreating the Past: Revivalism in Northeastern India”, Bijdragen: Journal
of the Royal Institute of Linguistics and Anthropology, 152 (1996), 275-92; and Stephen
Morey, “Ahom and Tangsa: Case Studies of Language Maintenance and Loss in North
East India”, Language Documentation and Conservation, 7 (2014), 46-77.