Metadata and endangered archives 47
a length distinction between /a/ and /aa/), but only five or six vowel symbols.
Thus, in Tai Phake a word written <king> would look like kigq (the equivalent
in Phake of the Ahom script above), but this can be pronounced as /keng/
or /kɛng/ as well as /king/, because in stop and nasal final syllables these
three different vowels are all written identically.39 In addition, there are six
contrastive tones in Phake. There are thus eighteen possible pronunciations in
Tai Phake for the word written king, and of those, twelve different meanings
have recorded for eight of the possible pronunciations.
We do not even know how many tones were present in spoken Tai Ahom,
let alone the form of those tones, but the expectation is that, as with the
modern spoken Tai languages, the tones may have exhibited a combination
of features: (relative) pitch; contour (change of pitch); phonation (plain,
breathy and creaky); and duration.40 Furthermore, it is likely that the number
and form of those tones changed over time, whereas because they were not
marked, the writing remained the same.
Native speakers who read Tai manuscripts of this type do so somewhat
differently from the way we read modern English, or the way we read older
manuscripts in the European tradition. Consider the English word horse.
When this is written in isolation, the meaning is clear to all native English
speakers. This is not so with the Ahom word (also written ) /ma/, which
ma m;
can mean “horse” but can also mean “dog”, “to come”, “shoulder” and,
in compounds, “fruit”. Which of these meanings is correct in a particular
manuscript depends on the context.
The following examples demonstrate the process of translation. We will
discuss this in detail with regard to the manuscript Ming Mvng Lung Phai,
what we term in English a “spirit calling” text. The main translators for
this text were Chaichuen Khamdaengyodtai, whose expertise is in Shan
languages and literature, and myself, with knowledge of comparative Tai
and Tai grammar. After the text had been transcribed for the first draft
translation in 2007, Chaichuen and I worked for a week with Nabin Shyam
Phalung, a speaker of the related Tai Aiton language, thoroughly experienced
in reading Tai Aiton texts, and for many years the Head of the Tai section at
the Department of Historical and Antiquarian Studies in Guwahati.41 The
39 For a discussion of the writing of vowels in the Tai Phake script, and how the script
under specifies the vowel contrasts, see Morey, The Tai Languages of Assam, pp. 190-94.
40 Stephen Morey, “Studying Tones in North East India: Tai, Singpho and Tangsa”,
Language Documentation and Conservation, 8 (2014), 637-71.
41 Nabin’s skills as both a native speaker of a closely related Tai language and his decades
of experience working with Tai Ahom manuscripts were not enough to allow him to
undertake the task of translating this text alone.