Metadata and endangered archives 43
As we will see in more detail below, the same syllable in Tai Ahom can
have a number of meanings, and khai could mean “shift”, “ill”, “tell” and
several other possibilities. Barua’s original translation for this line was “In
Lākni Kapmit (i.e., in 1540 AD) Chāophā Shuklenmung fell ill. He proceeded
to Tāimung and stopped there”, reading khai as “ill” which - would make
sense if not for the fact that it is followed by che. The combination of khai che,
however, only makes sense in the meaning “shift city”.
One of the surprising findings of our project so far is the significant
number of manuscripts containing stories that appear to be of Buddhist
origin. For example, the Nemi Mang story, one of the previous lives of the
Buddha,29 is found on folios 47r-66v of the manuscript owned by Gileswar
Bailung Phukan of Patsako.30 The greater part of the manuscript is a story
which is ultimately named in the text as Alika,31 which from its form and
content is likely to be a Buddhist story also.32 Only a more in-depth study
of all of the texts identified as stories will be able to establish how many of
them are of Buddhist origin.
The extent of Buddhist influence within the historical Ahom Kingdom
is a matter of controversy among the Ahom community, with some people,
particularly some of those connected with the royal caste (Rajkonwar),
expressing the view that the Tai Ahom were traditionally Buddhist, while
others maintain that this was not so. The place of Buddhism, as distinct from
both the traditional Ahom rituals of sacrifice and prayer to the ancestor
spirits, and the Hindu worship gradually adopted by the Ahoms after 1500,
is a matter for further research, but the manuscripts can help with this. Not
only are there Buddhist texts, like Nemi Mang, but also, as we will discuss in
more detail below, Buddhist features are found in some of the Ahom prayers
(mantras) that are still in use.
The Buddhist manuscripts and histories are relatively easy to translate
because in the case of histories, much of the detail is confirmed by Assamese
language sources,33 and in the case of Buddhist manuscripts, the stories are
29 The text in Pali is named Nimi Jataka and is no. 541 in the series of Jataka (previous lives of
the Buddha). This is a very famous story, illustrated, for example, in murals in temples in
Thailand, http://www.buddha-images.com/nimi-jataka.asp. An English translation is The
Jataka, Volume VII, trans. by E. B. Cowell and W. H. D. Rouse (1907), http://www.sacred-
texts.com/bud/j6/j6007.htm
30 Archived as EAP373_GileshwarBailung_NemiMang.
31 The naming of both manuscripts is on folio 66r, line 3. It was necessary to read a fair
amount of the text in order to find this.
32 Translations of these two texts are searchable online at the Tai and Tibeto-Burman
Languages of Assam website, http://sealang.net/assam
33 There are a number of Assamese Buranjis. For a discussion of them, see Lila Gogoi, The
Buranjis, Historical Literature of Assam: A Critical Survey (New Delhi: Omsons Publications,
1986).