Metadata and endangered archives 49
was held inside, at the conclusion of the third reading of the text the spirit
was felt to have returned, and the doors of the house were shut to keep it in.48
Ming Mvng Lung Phai is one of a number of such texts that we believe were
to be read when the whole country is in difficulty. The date of composition
of these texts is not known, but, in view of the related texts in the Zhuang
speaking areas of China, it is felt that they are very old. The version of the
text that we studied is owned by one of the most senior Tai Ahom priests
or Deodhai, Chaw Tileshwar Mohan, who has been a great supporter of this
research for many years. The project has identified other examples of this
text, but his version is by far the most complete and most reliable,49 as Fig.
2.7 below shows.
In the section of the text discussed below, the possible locations to which
the spirit has gone, and from which it will need to be recalled, are being
presented. One example of this is the passage of two lines: men ru ri nang
ru ba, men na cha nang lin kang. The poetics of this is clear. The first word is
parallel in both lines, as is the fourth word, and in addition there is a “waist
rhyme” between the end of the first line, ba, and the third syllable of the
second line, cha.
Our first translation of the two lines is given in Examples 3 and 4. Both
translations assumed that men was the word for non-Tai tribal people who live
in mountainous areas. This is assumed by people in Assam to refer to people
living on the border of India and Myanmar, an area mostly populated by
Naga people; therefore this word is usually translated as “Naga”. However,
if the text had been composed in the original home of the Tai Ahoms, on the
Myanmar-China border, this word would refer to a different tribal group,50
so we have glossed it as “Hill Tribal”.
48 For a more detailed discussion of spirit calling among the Ahom, see B. J. Terwiel, The
Tai of Assam and Ancient Tai Ritual, Volume I: Life Style Ceremonies (Gaya: Centre for South
East Asian Studies, 1980), p. 53. For the practice among the Zhuang in China, see David
Holm, Recalling Lost Souls: The Baeu Rodo Scriptures, Tai Cosmogonic Texts from Guangxi in
Southern China (Bangkok: White Lotus, 2004).
49 Unfortunately the first folio was damaged by insects between 2007, when I first
photographed it in JPG format, and 2012, when the EAP-funded project was able to take
raw format files and convert them to TIF format for archiving.
50 In Assam the word men is mostly associated with the people now called Naga, but in
Shan State the cognate word refers to the “ethnic group inhabiting the mountains of
Muang Ting”. Sao Tern Moeng, Shan-English Dictionary (Kensington, MD: Dunwoody
Press, 1995). The phrases “head like horses” and “roll up their chins” might refer to
people who wear long-necked decorations, such as the Kayan people in Shan state, i.e.
in the mountain areas on the China-Myanmar border. Photographs of women wearing
these decorations can be found on the Wikipedia page “Kayan people (Burma)”, http://
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kayan_people_%28Burma%29. Equally these might be ways of