60 From Dust to Digital
Chaichuen observed that this text, which he has never heard of in Shan
areas, refers to the history of Tai people in the Mekong river area, and
consequently must have been brought to Assam rather than composed
there. In his view, this would have to have been done before the destruction
of the kingdoms of Muang Mau Lung, Muang Kong and Muang Yang in
the year 1555. This campaign was led by the Burmese King Bayinnaung
of Toungoo (1550-1581). Thus our assumption is that the manuscript
must have been composed before 1555 and that it may not survive in
Mau Lung. Chaichuen said that this story could not have been brought
later, because all of the old manuscripts were burned during the wars
waged by King Bayinnaung. So far this is the only text we have analysed
that can definitely be associated with the Mau Lung area, but we expect
there are more among the manuscripts that have been photographed.
Scholarly outcomes
The major scholarly outcomes of EAP373 are: the transcription and
translation of a number manuscripts; the further development of the
online Tao Ahom Dictionary; the preparation of a descriptive grammar
of Tai Ahom; and the realization of the proposal to include Tai Ahom
script in the Unicode.
As we have seen, the process of transcribing and translating texts is very
time consuming, but they form the basis for the continued development
of the online Ahom Dictionary.60 At present the dictionary contains over
4,500 head words and many subentries for multiple senses of a word
and for compounds. Each word listed in the dictionary is sourced to an
Ahom manuscript, in many cases the Bar Amra, a Tai-Ahom to Assamese
lexicon. There are a number of copies of the Bar Amra, of which the most
important is kept at the Department of Historical and Antiquarian Studies
in Guwahati. The version that we were able to consult is that owned by
Junaram Sangbun Phukan, one of the most senior Ahom priests (Deodhai)
from Parijat village. The manuscript, written completely in Ahom script,
gives a word in Tai and then a translation in Assamese. An example is
given below (Fig. 2.11).
60 http://sealang.net/ahom