62 From Dust to Digital
Amra are included, but in addition words that we find in other manuscripts
are added when their meanings are confirmed. Each of those words is
sourced back to at least one example in the manuscripts. The online dictionary
includes the sentence containing an example of the word, in Ahom script,
transliteration, with English, Shan and sometimes Assamese translations.63
All the manuscripts referenced in the dictionary are also in the EAP archive.
The writing of a descriptive Ahom grammar, based on the language
examples as found in the manuscripts, whose translation is possible because
of their identification through this project. A sketch grammar, running to
around 34 pages has been already published: it is available in a published
article, and has been archived online as part of the DoBeS website.64
Finally, there is the development of a Unicode encoding for the Ahom
script, which has been jointly developed by Martin Hosken and myself.65 The
final version of the Ahom Unicode proposal was presented to the Unicode
consortium in October 2012 and approved. A first draft Tai Ahom unicode
font has been produced, together with a keyboard, and since July 2014 the
font has been in use by community members on Facebook and in some email
formats. There are some remaining technical issues to ensure that the font
renders correctly in word-processing programs like Microsoft Word or Open
Office.66 Nevertheless the fact that the Tai Ahom language can now be used
63 We are working towards making the dictionary truly quadrilingual (Tai Ahom, English,
Shan, Assamese) but this will take some time. Some entries are already quadrilingual, as
with the entry for kai (chicken).
64 For the published version, see Stephen Morey, “A Sketch of Tai Ahom”, in Axamiya aru
Axamar Bhasa [Assamese and the Languages of Assam], ed. by Biswajit Das and Axamar
Bhasa (Guwahati: AANK-Bank, 2011). At present the best way to access the online
Ahom materials is to follow a link to projects on the DoBeS website (http://www.mpi.
nl/DoBeS), then Tangsa, Tai and Singpho in Northeast India, then click on corpus and
then the node “Ahom”. All of the materials that we have deposited on the website are
available for download.
65 Martin Hosken and Stephen Morey, “Revised Proposal to add the Ahom Script in the
SMP of the UCS”, Working Group Document, 14 September 2012, http://www.unicode.
org/L2/L2012/12309-ahom-rev.pdf
66 The Ahom font renders perfectly on Facebook using the Mozilla Firefox browser, once
it is set as the default font. In other browsers and other platforms it may not work so
well, as yet. The reason for these rendering issues is the way in which characters are
coded. For example, the vowel /e/, is written before the consonant that it sounds after. So
the word ke is written ek which is e k. Unicode requires the /e/ to be encoded after the
consonant and therefore the fonts have to be designed so that the vowel appears in front
of the consonant even though it is encoded after. At present the Ahom Unicode font will
not work properly in Microsoft Word, and for that reason in this paper and in our online
dictionary and texts we are still using the old legacy font, designed by me in the 1990s.