48 From Dust to Digital
translation was then revised in 2008, in the Ahom village of Parijat, working
together with other members of the research team and also with several
members of the Tai Ahom priestly caste, including the manuscript’s owner.
This translation method, while probably the most reliable, was also
exceptionally time consuming and expensive, requiring the physical presence
of people from different countries in the same location. Subsequent texts have
been translated by Chaichuen doing a draft translation into Shan, after which
I translate the Shan into English; then Chaichuen and I meet, discuss and
revise the translation line by line. The new methodology has the advantage of
including a gloss in Shan as well as English, as we will see below in Example
8. Using one or other of these methods, we have completed translations of
the following manuscripts: Alika,42 Lakni,43 Ma Likha Lit,44 Ming Mvng Lung
Phai, Nemi Mang,45 Pvn Ko Mvng,46 running to approximately 4200 lines. All
the translations are searchable online at the Tai and Tibeto Languages of
Assam website.47
Returning to the Ming Mvng Lung Phai text, in Tai belief, if the spirit
(khon or khwan) of a person, of the paddy rice or of the country, or some
other entity, goes away, this causes difficulty. The spirit therefore has to be
recalled at a ceremony that includes the reading of an appropriate text. We
have never experienced an Ahom spirit calling ceremony, but have witnessed
the calling of the spirit of both an ill person and of rice in the Tai Phake and
Tai Khamyang communities. In the first case, a young person was ill, which
was attributed to the absence of the khon from the ill person; in the second
case an individual had a poor harvest, which was attributed to the absence
of the khon of the paddy rice. The ceremony, in which sweets and fruit were
offered to the spirit, included the reading of the appropriate spirit calling
text three times. In the case of the calling of the spirit of the ill person, which
42 This text, containing what we believe is probably a Buddhist story, forms the first two
thirds of EAP373_GileshwarBailung_Nemimang_0001 to 0139.tif.
43 This text was translated from a photocopy. The location of the original of this manuscript
is not known.
44 This text, containing what we believe is probably a Buddhist story, has yet to be
photographed for the project.
45 This text, a Buddhist story, forms the last third of EAP373_GileshwarBailung_
Nemimang_0001 to 0139.tif.
46 This text, which tells the story of the creation of the world, is archived as EAP373_
TileshwarMohan_PvnKoMvng_0001 to 0038.
47 This website (http://sealang.net/assam) is updated from time to time and additional texts
will be added as the translations are completed. The next one to be completed will be
the Nang Khai manuscript owned by the late Baparam Hatibaruah, the photographs of
which will be archived as EAP373_BaparamHatiBaruah_NangKhai_0001.tif to 0078.tif.