2. Metadata and endangered archives:
lessons from the Ahom
Manuscripts Project
Stephen Morey
Since 2011, the project EAP373: Documenting, conserving and archiving the Tai
Ahom manuscripts of Assam has been, with the help of the British Library’s
Endangered Archives Programme, digitising and documenting the written
legacy of the Tai Ahom.1 It has done this in three ways: by photographing
1 S ince 2007, this work on Ahom was funded first by the DoBeS Documentation of
Endangered Languages project, financed by the Volkswagen Stiftung, based at the Max
Planck Institute in Nijmegen, and later by the Australian Research Council under the
Future Fellowship Scheme. The project EAP373: Documenting, conserving and archiving
the Tai Ahom manuscripts of Assam (http://eap.bl.uk/database/overview_project.
a4d?projID=EAP373), which is on-going, has been funded by the Endangered Archives
Programme, whose support for my work is much appreciated. I am very grateful to
members of the research team, particularly Ajahn Chaichuen Khamdaengyodtai whose
work on Ahom manuscripts has provided so much enlightenment. The main task of
photography and metadata collection has been undertaken by Poppy Gogoi and Medini
Madhab Mohan, whose expertise in locating and identifying manuscripts has been
invaluable. In the early stages of this project Zeenat Tabassum, Karabi Mazumder, Iftiqar
Rahman, Jürgen Schöpf and Palash Nath all gave great assistance. The leading Ahom
pandits, Tileshwar Mohan and Junaram Sangbun Phukon, in particular have given
enormous help over the years. The support of the Centre for Research in Computational
Linguistics at the University of Maryland, and its director Doug Cooper has been very
beneficial for a long time. I am very grateful also to the editors of this volume, particularly
Maja Kominko and the anonymous reviewers for many helpful comments, and to Bianca
Gualandi for her work on images. Finally, I want to thank all the manuscript owners, the
Institute of Tai Studies and Research, and its director Girin Phukan; Bhim Kanta Baruah,
David Holm, B. J. Terwiel, Wilaiwan Khanittanan, Ranoo Wichasin, Thananan Trongdi,
Anthony Jukes, Pittayawat Pittayporn and Atul Borgohain, the last being my mentor and
supporter in Ahom studies for many years.
© Stephen Morey, CC BY http://dx.doi.org/10.11647/OBP.0052.02