40 From Dust to Digital
illustrated below as the opening of Example 9. This symbol is used to mark a
new paragraph or section within a manuscript. This section begins with the date,
lk qnI kt qko] (lak ni kat kau). The second sentence names the king as eka emo las qporq
(ko mo las por), the nearest Tai Ahom spelling for the Assamese name. It also
names the location as Song Su Kat, an old name for the city of Jorhat.
The pages of the manuscripts are usually numbered, using either Ahom
numerals or Ahom numbers spelled out in letters, or a combination of both;
in a few cases the Lakni cycle is used to number pages. Generally pages are
numbered on the verso side, but not always. The manuscript Sai Kai owned
by Padma Sangbun Phukan of Amguri has numbering on the recto side.21 We
did not realise this when the manuscript was photographed. At that time it
was arranged in order assuming that pages were numbered on the back so
that, after photographing the cover (images 0001 and 0002), the correct order
of the images is 0004, 0003, 0006, 0005, 0008, 0007, etc, something that was only
discovered as a result of working on a translation of the whole text. There are
probably other manuscripts photographed in the wrong order, because we
did not have the chance to carefully examine the text.
Most of these manuscripts have never been translated, because (a) Tai
Ahom language is no longer spoken or indeed understood by most of the
manuscript owners, (b) most of the manuscripts have never been photographed
or published in any way and have not been available for study, (c) much of the
ritual connected with the manuscripts is no longer practiced, making some of
the references in the texts impossible to understand, and (d) the Ahom script
under-specifies the sound distinctions in the languages, meaning that often a
single syllable represents several different pronunciations and meanings. The
EAP project has to a large extent overcome (b), by making photographs of over
400 texts. Before discussing points (c) and (d) in detail, the following section
will briefly survey the kind of manuscripts that have been found.
Types of Ahom manuscripts
The Tai Ahom manuscripts that we have photographed are of the following
types:
a. History (Buranji)22
b. Creation stories
21 This manuscript will be archived as EAP373_PadmaSangBunPhukan_SaiKai_0001 to
0058.tif.
22 This is an Assamese term, of possible Tai origin, referring to histories.