52 From Dust to Digital
original home of the Tai Ahom, now inside the Dehong prefecture in Yunnan
Province, China. To get the translation to what we see in Examples 5 and 6
requires a deep knowledge of Tai literature that is rapidly becoming extinct, and
the ability to read texts in the traditional away. The modernisation of the Shan
script since the 1950s, which includes the marking of tone, has made reading
a Shan text much more like reading an English text, because the words with
different tones are now marked differently.51 The last of the expert readers
from the generation brought up before script modernisation are now becoming
elderly, and the younger generation, brought up with the reformed script, are
reported to have great difficulty reading the traditional texts.
This is the key difference between the challenge of interpreting the Tai
Ahom manuscripts and those of interpreting, for example, old English
manuscripts, or Latin manuscripts from a period much older than the Ahom
texts. Old English and Latin are languages where the script is essentially
phonemic, marking most phonemic contrasts. The meaning of a single word
is clear, in all but very uncommon cases of homography (such as the modern
English bear which could be noun (“type of animal”) or verb (“hold up”)
with completely different meaning). In Tai Ahom on the other hand, every
written syllable has multiple meanings — in some cases as many as twenty
have been recorded — and the texts can only be interpreted in context, and
with a very substantial vocabulary at the call of the translator.
One major claim in this paper is that it is of the greatest importance that
good quality translations be made of as many of the manuscripts as possible
because this is unlikely to be possible to the same extent in the future.
Whereas the translation of a Latin or Old English text is likely to be just as
possible in 100 years time as it is now, this is not the case with Tai Ahom,
because the generation of Chaichuen is the last which has been trained in
reading Tai texts in the traditional way, and those are the skills required to
interpret these texts correctly.
Even making basic metadata on a single manuscript is not something that
can be done without considerable effort. We have been fortunate in having
Chau Medini Madhab Mohan as a consultant on our project, not only because
he has knowledge of the location of large numbers of manuscripts, but also
because his experience in studying them has allowed him to identify texts
reasonably quickly. This identification is partly done by reading some portion
51 See Søren Egerod, “Essentials of Shan Phonology and Script”, Academia Sinica: Bulletin
of the Institute of History and Philology, 29 (1957), 121-27. For further details of Shan script
and script reform, see Sai Kam Mong, The History and Development of the Shan Scripts
(Chiang Mai: Silkworm, 2004).