Metadata and endangered archives 33
not be shared, and this belief has to be respected; however, the injunction
presented as Example 14 below, in our opinion, shows that in the minds of
earlier copyists and custodians the knowledge in these manuscripts should
be made available. Secondly, since many aspects of Tai Ahom culture have
been lost in the last 300 years, those portions of the culture that remain — of
which the manuscripts are a large part — become even more important to
the community, and there is a sense in which these should not be shared
casually with outsiders.
We had a number of meetings with community leaders in different villages
to discuss and explain the project, answer questions, and present our work. One
of the achievements of the overall project, the online Tai Ahom dictionary,5 was
a big argument in favour of our project. Despite some difficulties, most of the
manuscript owners have been pleased to have the manuscripts photographed
and those photographs preserved and available for study.6
The actual photography itself is not always an easy process. We used a
camera with a fixed distance lens to avoid distortion at the edges of the shot.
For most manuscripts this worked well. Ban Seng manuscripts, for example,
were often only approximately 5 cm wide and 8 cm long. But with a large
manuscript it was often necessary to stand far above the manuscript to get a
shot of the whole page. Du Kai Seng manuscripts were typically much larger,
as much as 12 cm wide and 47 cm long. Even bigger were cloth manuscripts
(usually with the text Phe Lung Phe Ban). The following photograph (Fig. 2.1)
shows Iftiqar Rahman taking photos of a large nineteenth-century paper
manuscript, a Phe Lung Phe Ban belonging to Hara Phukan of Amguri Deodhai
village, in which each page was approximately 35 cm wide and 45 cm long.7
5 http://sealang.net/ahom
6 Kamol Rajkonwar, who lives on the banks of the Disangpani River at Lakwa, was
particularly keen to get his manuscripts photographed and delighted that the work was
being undertaken. When we arrived at his house, he surprised me by producing a copy
of my 2002 doctoral thesis on the Tai languages of Assam. Disangpani is an example
of a name with elements from possibly three different languages. Di is a word for
the Boro or Dimasa language, the language of the pre-Ahom inhabitants of the area,
meaning “water”. Most of the rivers in the Ahom area have names with Di- as a prefix.
The meaning of sang is not known but could be Tai Ahom, and pani is Assamese for
“water”. The place where Rajkonwar lives is near a large outdoor area sacred to the Tai
Ahoms, containing altars to some of the deities mentioned in some manuscripts. The
exact function of this sacred area is not known and, as far as I know, it has not been
investigated in a scholarly manner.
7 Iftiqar Rahman is a Master’s graduate in linguistics who assisted Poppy Gogoi with
photography on several occasions.