42 From Dust to Digital
Baruah of Amguri Deodhai village, possesses no fewer than nine separate
versions of the Du Kai Seng text, which is used for the interpretation of chicken
bones after sacrifice. There are multiple examples of each of the categories
listed above, and future students of these manuscripts will, in time, be able
to compare different versions of the same text.
The most widely known texts, both among the Ahom community themselves
and among the wider community, are the histories or Buranjis. One set of
Buranji manuscripts was translated by G. C. Barua, with two parallel texts,
one in Ahom (using Ahom script) and the other an English translation.26 It
is relatively easy to match the two texts and thus make an in-depth study of
the translation, but because Barua’s knowledge of Ahom was sketchy, the
translation is not reliable. It is, however, a widely available book that has
been reprinted several times. The Buranji texts have been translated more
recently into Standard Thai by Ranoo Wichasin.27 To illustrate the problems
with Barua’s translation, consider Example 1.28 Our analysis, based on Ranoo’s
translation relies on the reading of the phrase khai che as “shift city”.
Example 1)
lkqnI kpqmitq cMwfa sEwkEnqmE[q xj ec]
lak ni kap mit cham chau pha sv kvn mvng khai che
year Kap Mit nfin-king pn shift city
m; yU tj mE[q /
ma ju tai mvng
come stay at Tai country
“In the year Kap Mit, King Svkvnmvng shifted his (capital)
city to Tai Mvng”.
26 Golap Chandra Barua, Ahom Buranji: From the Earliest Time to the End of Ahom Rule
(Guwahati: Spectrum, 1985 [1930]).
27 Ranoo Wichasin, trans., Ahom Buranji (Bangkok: Amarin, 1996).
28 We will present examples here in four lines: (1) Ahom script, (2) suggested phonemic
reading, (3) English gloss, and (4) free translation into English.
We use the symbol <v> to mark an unrounded back vowel /ɯ/ or /ɤ/ in IPA script. Some
Tai languages like Phake have a distinction between these two sounds, but there is
reason to believe that in Ahom this distinction had been lost by the end of the Ahom
Kingdom. This is discussed in Stephen Morey, The Tai Languages of Assam: A Grammar
and Texts (Canberra: Pacific Linguistics, 2005), p. 176. We write <ⱱ> to encourage the
members of the Ahom community not to pronounce it as /u/ or /e/, a practice that can be
seen in Barua’s translation, where the same vowel is present in all three syllables of the
king’s name, written as /u/ in the first and third syllables, with the second syllable being
read as having an /e/ vowel with an initial consonant cluster.